A. PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT (GRADE LEVEL 07-17) QUESTIONS

1. In 1494, ...................published a treatise on the double-entry system of bookkeeping.
a. Thomas Aquinas
b. Akintola Williams
c. Luca Pacioli
d. Albert Einstein

2. ...............are the prices paid for living in an organized, and civilized society.
a. Stipends
b. Wages
c. Remunerations
d. Taxes

3. The Audit Ordinance Act 1956 requires the Accountant-General to submit a financial report to the Auditor-General within ..........after the end of each financial year.
a. Three (3) months
b. Nine (9) months
c. Seven (7) months
d. Six (6) months.

4. Internal users of Government financial information include the following except:
a. The Government as an Entity.
b. Members of the Executives, Advisers and Senior Civil Servants, 
c. Ministries, Extra-Ministerial Departments and Agencies.
d. Communities in the wilderness.

5. It was stipulated in the Audit Ordinance Act of 1956 that the Accountant-General must render the following reports but one to the Auditor-General for audit purposes.
a. Prior Years Accounts.
b. An abstract of receipts and payments.
c. A Statement of Assets and Liabilities
d. A detailed Sttatement of Revenue and Expenditure.

6. The qualitative characteristics of financial information of public sector entities are both.................
a. social and scientific
b. advanced and pivotal
c. elementary and tertiary
d. fundamental and enhancing

7. External users of Government financial information include the following but one:
a. Consultants, and other members of professional bodies
b. Investors and Creditors
c. Assailants
d. Oversight bodies, Donor Agencies and general public.

8. The financial information of public sector entities have the following qualities except.................
a. relevance and faithful representative
b. essentiality and secrecy
c. comparability and verifiability
d. understandability and timeline

9. A statement of cash flow has the following but one of the activities.
a. Economic activities
b. Operating activities
c. Investing activities
d. Financing activities

10. Users of government financial information can be both................and ................
a. Basic and advanced users
b. Internal and External users.
c. Legacy and New users
d. Primary and Secondary users.

11. A Revenue Collector must periodically present his cash book and receipt books for examination by.............
a. Officer Controlling Expenditure.
b. Director of Consolidated Accounts.
c. Sub-Accounting Officer.
d. Inland Revenue Service Inspector.

12. Arrears of Revenue are revenues collectable during a given financial year but which remains uncollected .................. after the close of that financial year. 
a. Nine (9) months
b. Twelve (12) months
c. Six (6) months
d. Three (3) months

13. Remittance of tax revenue must be made to the Nigeria Revenue Service (NRS) not later than ..............after deduction.
a. Seven (7) days.
b. Twenty-one (21) days.
c. Fifteen (15) days.
d. Twenty-four (24) days.

14. Internally Generated Revenues (IGR) collected by a Ministry/Extra Ministerial Office must be remitted to the Consolidated Revenue Fund (CRF) on or before .........of the subsequent month after collection.
a. Seven (7) days.
b. Twenty-one (21) days.
c. Twenty-four (24) days.
d. Fifteen (15) days.

15. ...............is issued before the passage of the Appropriation Act to keep government services running.
a. Virement Warrant
b. SUpplementary Warrant
c. Provisional General Warrant 
d. Development Fund Warrant.

16. .............. authorises the Accountant-General to  issue funds to pay for the personal emoluments and other services provided in the Annual Estimates.
a. Recurrent Expenditure General Warrant
b. SUpplementary Warrant
c. Provisional General Warrant 
d. Development Fund Warrant.

17. The Provisional General Warrant authorises the withdrawal of money from the CRF as may be necessary for carrying on the services of government for a period not exceeding ................. and at a level not exceeding the level of those services prevailing in the previous financial year.
a. Nine (9) months
b. Twelve (12) months
c. Three (3) months
d. Six (6) months.

18. .............. may be issued in very exceptional cases, where virement is not possible and where an application for additional provision reveals such a degree of urgency.
a.Circumstantial General Warrant
b. Supplementary (Contingencies) Warrant
c. Provisional General Warrant 
d. Development Fund Warrant.

19. ............ authorises the Accountant- General to issue funds to pay for the additional personal emoluments and other services which must have been approved in Supplementary Estimates.
a. Circumstantial General Warrant
b. Prudential Development Fund Warrant
c. Supplementary General Warrant
d. Provisional General Warrant 

20. ..........is issued when, as a result of circumstances which could not have been foreseen when the Annual Estimates were being compiled.
a. Circumstantial General Warrant
b. Prudential Development Fund Warrant
c. Provisional General Warrant 
d. Virement Warrant.

21. .................. entails receipts and payments for services that are not specified in the approved Annual Budget estimates. 

a. Below-the-line 
b. Cost-management accounts
c. Over-the-line 
d. Cash-basis

22. The followings are the conditions for virement of funds except:
a. The amount to be vired, should not exceed any limit prescribed by the National Assembly
b. Virement should not be used to create a new sub-head or re-introduce items disallowed by the National Assembly.
c. Virement must not apply to queries raised by the Auditor General. 
d. Virement must not be used to pad annual estimates.

23. ........... is issued where necessary, additional expenditure over and above that included in the General Warrant or in a Supplementary General Warrant, 
a. Supplementary (Statutory) Expenditure Warrant
b. Prudential Development Fund Warrant
c. Provisional General Warrant 
d. Circumstantial General Warrant

24 ................will be issued where the Capital Expenditure Estimate has not come into operation at the commencement of the financial year. 
a. Virement Warrant
b. SUpplementary Warrant
c. Provisional Development Fund General Warrant 
d. Authority-to-Incur Expenditure (AIE).

25................. is granted for a particular purpose and it must be retired in full when the purpose has been achieved.  
a. Prepayment
b. Non-personal cash Advance
c. Accrual
d. Special Imprest

26. ...................... authorises the Accountant General to issue funds for expenditure on capital projects, as specified in the Annual Estimates
a. Development Fund General Warrant
b. Virement Warrant
c. SUpplementary Warrant
d. Authority-to-Incur Expenditure (AIE).

27....................... authorises the Accountant General to issue funds to incur expenditure on supplementary capital projects, as contained in the Annual Supplementary Capital Estimates.
a. Prudential Development Fund Warrant
b. Virement Warrant
c. Development Fund Supplementary General Warrant
d. Authority-to-Incur Expenditure (AIE).

28....................... authorises the Accountant General to issue funds and the Officers Controlling Expenditure  to incur expenditure in certain 'circumstances on capital projects beyond the amounts provided for the year concerned in the Annual or Supplementary Capital Estimates. 
a. Prudential Development Fund Warrant
b. Circumstantial General Warrant
c. Authority-to-Incur Expenditure (AIE). 
d. Development Fund Supplementary Warrant

29.............. is authorised by the Federal Executive Council (FEC) when an application for Supplementary provision reveals a degree of urgency which makes it essential that funds be immediately made available to meet expenditure which cannot be provided for. by virement or without serious injury to the public interest, be postponed until adequate provision-can be made by the National Assembly. 
a. Prudential Development Fund Warrant
b. Development Fund (Special) Warrant
c. Authority-to-Incur Expenditure (AIE). 
d. Citizen-focused Fund General Warrant

30........................ Authorizes the reallocation of capital funds from one sub-head to another within the same budget vote where there are savings.
a. Prudential Development Fund Warrant
b. Circumstantial General Warrant
c. Authority-to-Incur Expenditure (AIE). 
d. Development Fund Virement Warrant

31. .............. are replenished from time to time during a financial year by the submission of paid vouchers to Sub- Accounting Officers for reimbursement. 
a. Standing Imprests 
b. Non-personal cash Advance
c. Accrual
d. Prepayment

32. The following are conditions for capital development fund virement warrant except:
a. Fund re-allocation must be only within the same Head of Expenditure in the Capital Estimates.
b. The re-allocation may be part of the responses to Audit Query from the Auditor-General.
c. The re-allocation must not exceed the limits the Head of estimates approved by the National Assembly.
d. The re-allocation must not be intended to give rise to a new project.

33. Authority-to-incur Expenditure (AIE) can be categorized into two:
a. Regular AIE, and Special AIE
b. Primary AIE, and Secondary AIE
c. Basic AIE, and Advanced AIE
d. Main AIE, and Supplementary AIE.

34. The recurrent expenditure is funded from the Consolidated Revenue Fund (CRF) while the capital expenditure is funded from ....................
a. Deposit Money Bank (DMB) capital account (DMBCA).
b. Central Capital Account (CCA).
c. Transitional Capital Account (TCA)
d. Commercial Bank Back Capital Account (CBBCA).

35. Payment vouchers (PVs) received in the Checking Section should not be held in that Section for more than ............
a. Twenty-Four (24) hours
b. Seventy-Two (72) hours
c. Forty-Eight (48) hours
d. Thirty-Six  (36) hours               

36.  A Sub-Accounting Officer may not make payment against a payment voucher (PV) if it is more than ..................since the voucher was signed by officer controlling expenditure.
a. Three (3) months
b. Nine (9) months
c. One (1) month
d. Six (6) months

37. .............involve standard, budgeted revenues and expenditure that are planned for the financial year.
a. Cost-management accounts
b. Over-the-line accounts
c. Cash-based accounts
d. Above-the-line accounts

38. ...............refers to all sums advanced to a public officer to meet expenditure under current estimates, for which vouchers cannot immediately be presented to a Sub- Accounting Officer for payment.  
a. Non-personal cash Advance
b. Imprest 
c. Accrual
d. Prepayment

39. Within ..............of the end of every financial year, each self-accounting Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office is expected to a statutory Return on imprest received and retired to the Office of the Accountant General of the Federation.
a. Seven (7) days.
b. Twenty-four (24) days.
c. Twenty-one (21) days. 
d. Fifteen (15) days.

40. ........... is the personal emolument paid to an employee of an organisation, for services rendered at a predetermined rate of pay. 
a. Employee Contribution
b. Allowance
c. Take-home
d. Salary

41. ...................are the legal instruments that empower and guide all public officers in carrying out government financial transactions.
a. Fiscal Documents
b. Financial Authorities
c. Revenue Authorities
d. Monetary Instruments.

42. Government funds include the following except:
a. Consolidated Revenue Fund (CRF)
b. Development Fund
c. Contingencies Fund
d. Regulatory Fund

43. Financial Authorities could be in form of any of the following except:
a. The 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria
b. Finance (Control and Management) Act, 1958
c. The Annual Appropriation Act
d. The Local Government Financial Autonomy Act.

44. ...........is the Head of the Federal Government Accounting Services and Treasury
a. Sub-Treasurer of the Federation
b. Director - Funds Management of the Federal Government
c. Accountant-General of the Federation 
d. Finance Minister and Co-ordinating Minister of the Economy.

45. The Officer who is constitutionally responsible for the audit and report on the public accounts of the Federation is ..............
a. Sub-Treasurer of the Federation
b. Auditor General for the Federation
c. Director, Audit monitoring
d. Finance Minister and Co-ordinating Minister of the Economy.

46. ..............is responsible for providing adequate accounting systems and controls in the Ministries, Extra-Ministerial Departments and Agencies (MDAs) of Government.

a. Auditor-General for the Federation
b. Finance Minister and Co-ordinating Minister of the Economy.
c. Director - Funds Management of the Federal Government
d. Accountant-General of the Federation 

47. The Auditor-General performs the following statutory functions except:
a. Financial Audit.
b. Appropriation Audit
c. Generic Audit
d. Value-for-Money Audit.

48. The Officer who is in full control of, and is responsible for human, material and financial resources which are critical inputs in the management of an organization.
a. Director, Administration and Finance
b. Honourable Minister
c. Accounting Officer
d. Director, Human Resources Management.

49. ................ is an officer who is entrusted with the receipt, custody and disbursement of public money and who is required to keep one of the recognised Cash books together with such other books of accounts.
a. Auditor General
b. Sub-Accounting Officer
c. Accounting Officer
d. Director, Human Resources Management.

50. The term "Sub-Accounting Officer" is applicable to the following officers except:
a. Director, Finance & Accounts or Head of Accounts
b. the Sub-Treasurer of the Federation.
c. Federal Pay Officer, Police Pay Officer, Customs Area Pay Officer and Pensions Pay Officer.
d. Accountant General of the sub-national Government. 

51. ................. is an officer, other than a Sub- Accounting officer, who is entrusted with an official receipt, licence or ticket booklet for the regular collection of some particular forms of revenue and who is required to keep a cash book. 
a. Revenue Collector
b. Head of Funds Section
c. Chairman, Inland Revenue Service
d. Head of Bursary Section.

52. A .............is one in· which the responsibility for the maintenance of the detailed record of expenditure and revenue and the Below-the-line payments and receipts ofthe ministry/extra-ministerial office and other arms of government or unit is delegated to the Accounting Officer.
a. Self-Accounting Unit. 
b. National Accounting Ministry
c. Finance Attache in the Nigerian Embassy.
d. Central Pay Office (CPO).

53. ..................is a managerial control which functions by measuring and evaluating the effectiveness of lnternal Control system in an organisation. 
a. Federal Auditor
b. Director, Finance and Account
c. Internal Audit
d. Accountant General of the Federation

54. Checked and passed vouchers received in the........................ must be promptly dealt with and, under no circumstance, must a voucher be held in that Unit for more than forty-eight (48) hours.  
a. Internal Audit Unit
b. Public Procurement Unit
c. Finance and Admin. Department
d. Auditor General's Office

55. An officer will be precluded from carrying out the duties of internal audit staff if he has previously been engaged on ..................... within the ministry, extra ministerial office and other arms of government. 
a. Procurement Duties
b. Legalistic Duties
c. accounting Duties
d. Administrative Duties

56. The ranks of Internal Audit staff who are empowered to make use of audit stamps, must not be below ............. in Abuja and ..........outside Abuja.
a. GL.15,     GL.14
b. GL.09,      GL.08          
c. GL.07,      GL.06
d. GL.12,      GL.10

57. ............... is not transferable from one officer to another.  
a. Account 'Paid" stamp 
b. stamp duty certificate
c. company sealed stamp
d. Internal audit stamp

58. An ..................is held  after the close of business on the last business day of each financial year to examine the cash, bank balances and stamps in an MDA.
a. Annual Board of Enquiry
b. Annual Board of Agencies and Parastatals meeting
c. Annual Board of Survey
d. Annual Ministerial Tenders Board (MTB) meeting

59. It is the responsibility of the Director, Treasury Inspectorate Department of the Office of the Accountant-General of the Federation (OAGF) to convene .............
a. Annual Board of Enquiry
b. Annual Board of Agencies and Parastatals meeting
c. Annual Ministerial Tenders Board (MTB) meeting
d. Annual Board of Survey

60. Members of the Board of Survey are ........in number.
a. Three (3)
b. Six (6)
c. Two (2)
d. Five (5)

61. Stores are broadly classified into ..................... and .....................
a. Primary and Secondary Stores
b. New and obsolete Stores
c. Allocated and Unallocated Stores.
d. Crude and Refined Stores.

62. ....................., ....................and....................three further categories of Government Stores
a. Primary,  Secondary,  and Tertiary Stores
b. New, fairly new, and old Stores
c. Allotted, Unalloted, and Fairly Alloted Stores.
d. Expendable, Non-Expendable, and Consumable Stores.

63. .......... or ...............must not be used in place of local purchase order or job order for the procurement of stores locally.
a. Allocated or Unallocated working materials
b. special imprest or cash advance
c. Expendable or Consumable retired items.
d. Secondary or tertiary stores

64. A Board of Enquiry may not be necessary due to the following except:
a. if the Joss is immaterial.
b. if it is an isolated incident.
c. if the identity of the officer responsible is indisputable.
d. if collusion is suspected.  

65. The following are conditions for setting up a Board of Inquiry except:
a. if fraud is probable. 
b. if the identity of the officer responsible is indisputable.
c. if several officers are involved, and the loss took place over a period of time; and  
d. if the loss is substantial. 

66. Board of Survey (BoS) should consist of at least ...............members while the Chairman of the BoS should not be below Grade Level..................
a. Three (3),      GL. 14
b. Nine (9),       GL. 16
c. Six (6),        GL. 12
d. Five (5),       GL. 07 

67. A Board of Survey will be required to inspect a minimum of............ of the stock categories, but if a serious discrepancy is found or suspected, then a.............inspection must be conducted.
a. 10 per cent,                 90 per cent
b. 40 per cent,                100 per cent 
c. 25 per cent,                 75 per cent
d. 30 per cent,                 70 per cent

68. Any public officer who is alleged to be involved in the inflation of contract would be allowed .......... within which to respond to audit query addressed to him.
a. 30 days
b. 14 days
c. 5 days
d. 7 days.

69.  A query on an unauthorised variation of contract(s) and procurement shall be answered within..........of issue.
a. 30 days
b. 21 days
c. 12 days
d. 14 days.

70. A store-keeper or an officer-in-charge of store is required to answer an audit query on a shortage or loss of stores within..............of issue.
a. 14 days
b. 24 days
c. 10 days
d. 6 days.

71. How many chapters are in the Financial Regulations? 
a. 19 chapters
b. 23 chapters
c. 32 chapters
d. 11 chpters

72. Who endorsed the Preface of the 2009 Financial Regulations.
a. Dr. (Mrs.) Okonjo Iweala, Former Finance Minister of Nigeria.
b. Former President Goodluck Jonathan
c. Former President Olusegun Obasanjo
d. Dr. Mansur Muhtar, Former Finance Minister of Nigeria.

73. Open Treasury Portal of the Federal Government of Nigeris is aimed at......................
a. ensuring transparency and accountability to the public as well as securing citizens' trust.
b. Engendering government openness in allowing citizens to elect their preferred candidates.
c. promoting people's access to intrerest free loans and grants.
d. enhancing transparency in the distribution of relief materials to victims of insecurity in the country.

74....................is a memorandum account umaintained by an officer controlling expenditure for the control of expenditure in a budget year.
a. Vote Book
b. Treasury cash Book.
c. Managment Account Book
d. Cash Requisition Book

75. The Government's Financial Transparency Policy requires that the monthly budget performance report is ready within ........of the end of the month.
a. 14 days
b. 24 days
c. 7 days
d. 3 days.

76. The Government's Financial Transparency Policy stipulates that the monthly fiscal accounts are rendered within ........of the end of the month.
a. 14 days
b. 24 days
c. 7 days
d. 3 days.

77. ...................is an accounting document made or written on a prescbribed form, which contains the full particulars of a transaction in favour of persons (s) or organization to whom sum of money is due.
a. Auhority-to-incur Expenditure (AIE)
b. Voucher
c. Warrant
d. Financial Regulations.


78. The following rules except one must be observed when preparing a payment voucher (PV).
a. A PV must be legible, readable and clearly written.
b. Use of a proper treasury form
c. The use of the right cheque folio
d. Erasure or alteration of any kind is not allowed.

79. VOte book is also known as .......................
a. Departmental Expenditure VOte Allocation Book (DEVAB)
b. Treasury cash Book.
c. Managment Account Book
d. Cash Requisition Book

80. ...................cash loans to officers who are employees of the Government.
a. Auhority-to-incur Expenditure (AIE)
b. Voucher
c. Warrant
d. Advances







PUBLIC FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT (ANSWERS)

1. c
2. d
3. c
4. d
5. a
6. d
7. c
8. b
9. a
10. b
11.  c
12.  d
13.  b
14.  d
15.  c
16.  a
17.  d
18.  b
19.  c
20. d
21. a
22. d
23. a
24. c
25. d
26. a
27. c
28. d
29. b
30. d
31. a
32. b
33. a
34. b
35. c
36. a
37. d
38. b
39. c
40. d
41. b
42. d
43. d
44. c
45. b
46. d
47. c
48. c
49. b
50. d
51. a
52. a
53. c
54. a
55. c
56. b
57. d
58. c
59. d
60. a
61. c
62. d
63. b
64. d
65. b
66. a
67. b
68. c
69. b
70. a
71. c
72. d
73. a
74. a
75. c
76. a
77. d
78. c
79. a
80. d






PERMANENT SECRETARIES' QUESTIONS (ORAL)

1. Mention ten (10) financial laws /authorities guiding public sector financial transactions in Nigeria.
2. Enumerate the six (6) components of IPSAS-accrual general purpose financial statements (GPFS).
3. Highlight six (6) major differences between IPSAS Accrual-based and cash-based accounting.
4. Mention the objectives of financial statements.
5. What are the pieces of financial information that Users of Government financial report need?
6. Briefly describe the benefits of Accountability and Transparency.
7. State some objectives of the Federal GOvernment's Financial Transparency Policy.
8. What are the roles of OAGF in the Federal Government's Financial Transparency Initiative?
9. What are the roles of MDAs in the Federal Government's Financial Transparency Initiative?
10. Mention types of vouchers usually found in an MDA.


PERMANENT SECRETARIES' ANSWERS (ORAL)
I. a. The Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria as amended.
   b. Finance (Control and Management) Act, 1958
   c. Cheque Act, 1957
   d. Audit Ordinance Act, 1956.
   e. Revenue Mobilization and Fiscal Allocation Act, 1982
   f. Public Procurement Act, 2007
   g. Pension Reform Act, 2014
   h. The Annual Appropriation Act
   i. Fiscal Responsibility Act. 
   j. Nigeria Revenue Service Act, 2025
   k. The Supplemenatry Appropriation Act.

2. a. Statement of Financial Position
   b. Statement of Financial Performance
   c. Statement of Cash Flows.
   d. Statement of Net Assets/ Equity
   e. Notes to the Financial Statements.
   f. Statement of Accounting Policies

3. (a) Timing of Recognition: 
Under Accrual IPSAS, revenues and expenses are recorded when they are earned or incurred, irrespective of when cash changes hands. 
Under Cash IPSAS, transactions are only recorded when cash is actually received or paid.

   (b) Tracking of Receivables and Payables: 
Accrual IPSAS accounts for outstanding receivables and payables. 
Cash IPSAS does not track payables or receivables, meaning outstanding debts aren't visible on the primary statements.

   (c) Asset Depreciation:
Accrual IPSAS mandates capitalizing fixed assets and spreading their cost over their useful lives via depreciation. 
Cash IPSAS typically expenses the full cost of an asset at the time of purchase and does not record depreciation.

   (d) Financial Statements Provided: 
Accrual IPSAS requires a full suite of reports, including a Statement of Financial Position (Balance Sheet), Statement of Financial Performance (Income Statement), and Statement of Cash Flows. 
Cash IPSAS primarily requires a Statement of Cash Receipts and Payments.

   (e) Accuracy and Performance Representation: 
Accrual IPSAS follows the matching principle, providing a much clearer and more accurate picture of a government's or agency's financial health, performance, and true cost of operations. 
Cash IPSAS focuses strictly on liquidity and cash availability rather than economic performance.

    (f) Complexity and Implementation: 
Accrual IPSAS is more complex, requiring advanced IT systems, professional training, and double-entry bookkeeping. 
Cash IPSAS is simpler, follows a single-entry cash system, and is easier to implement for governments with limited resources.

4. 
a. Accountability: Ensuring that public funds are utilized in accordance with legislative mandates, appropriation acts, and statutory budgets.
b. Evaluating Performance: Helping citizens and policymakers assess the economical and efficient delivery of public services.
c. Resource Allocation & Sustainability: Detailing how activities are financed and assessing the entity's capacity to continue providing services and paying its liabilities.
d. Transparency: Providing a clear, comprehensive, and comparable view of the government's entire financial operations. 

5. GOvernment financial information is needed to:
a. know the sources and types of revenues of Government.
b. evaluate the allocation and use of resources.
c. ascertain the extent to which available are adequate enough to sustain cost of operations.
d. evaluate the financial performance of the government's Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and Government Business Enterprises. (GBEs).
e. know the economic impact of the Government's policies and programmes on the citizens.
f. Ascertain public funds are used in line with extant rules and regulations.
g. evaluate whether the Government is able to meet its short-term and long-term financial obligations. 


6.a. BENEFITS OF ACCOUNTABILITY
Accountability means taking onwership and being answerable for one's action and its consequences wthether positive or negative.
Benefits of Accountability
a. It promotes trust.
b. Improves performance and prodcutivity
c. It enables errors to be figured out and identification of areas for improvements.
d. It promotes fairness and minimises bias.
e. It enhances dispute resolutions.

6.b. BENEFITS OF TRANSPARENCY
Transparency means openness and honesty to all stakeholders.
a. It fosters credibility.
b. It promotes ethical conduct
c. It enhances informed decision.
d. It boosts employees' engagement.
e. It promotes public accountability.


7. Objectives of the Federal GOvernment's Financial Transparency Policy.
a. To enable the public to report any observed financial wrongdoing in a public sector entity.
b. To promote a fight against corruption.
c. To facilitate the freedom of information implementation.
d. To promote the government's whistle Blower Policy.
e. To make financial information available to the general public on a timely basis.


8. Roles of OAGF in the Federal GOvernment's Financial Transparency Initiative (FTI)
a. To mainitain the transparency web portal, i.e. wwww.opentreasury.gov.ng.
b. To publish all financial information on the Government-affliated payment platforms, i.e. GIFMIS and REMITA.
c. To maintain FTI Help-Desk for attending to queries on an MDA's financial allegations.
d. For financial transparency monitoring and compliance among MDAs.
e. To recommend sanctions for any MDA's non-compliance with FTI.

9. Roles of MDAs in the Federal GOvernment's Financial Transparency Initiative (FTI)
a. To ensure that Payments that are processed through GIFMIS and REMITA are properly narrated.
b. To designate an officer not below the Head of Finance and Accounts to be responding to questions on FTI.
c. To ensure that all revenues are remitted through the GIFMIS Revenue Reference Number (GRRN).
d.To ensure that transfers to MDAs' Sub-TSA domiced with CBN have proper narrations of amounts and beneficiaries.
e. To be rsponsible for any wrong description of financial transactions. 


10. Types of Vouchers.
a. Payment voucher
b. Receipt voucher
c. Adjustment voucher
d. Store Issued voucher (SIV)
e. Store Receipt voucher (SRV)






B. PUBLIC SERVICE RULES - GRADE 07-17 (QUESTIONS)



1. All officers must take the confirmation examination within...........years from the date of assuming duty.
a. One (1) year
b. four (4) years
c. Two (2) years
d. Three (3) years. 

2. Where Gazette of 1st Appointment and Confirmation of Appointment are not ready within .........years, COMPRO examination result should be used in their place.
a. One (1) year
b. two (2) years
c. four (4) years
d. Three (3) years. 

3. The emolument of newly employed officers shall be paid as from the date of assumption of duty and they shall be placed on IPPIS platform within .......months of assumption of duty.
a. Four months
b. Two months
c. Three months
d. Twelve months.

4. If an Officer is promoted to a grade level that does not overlap his previous grade level, he will be placed at the......of his new salary grade level.
a. Minimum point
b. Maximum point
c. Mid-Point
d. Greater point

5. Payment of promotion arrears would be made within the .......promotion is effected.
a. Month
b. Week
c. Day
d. Year.

6. An Officer on an incremental grade level would normally be granted an increment unless he is on:
a. Interdiction/ suspension.
b. disciplinary action pending against him.
c. his MDA's reward and regonition list.  
d. On account of poor performance.

7. The Annual Performance Evaluation Report (APER) was replaced with.....................
a. Balanced Score Card (BSC).
b. Management by Objectives (MBO)
c. Future-focused Employee Performance System (FEPS)
d. Performance Management System (PMS)

8. The Performance Management System (PMS) focuses on ..............
a. employees' measurable output and certain competencies required to deliver job tasks and meet agreed targets.
b. making incongruent the organizational goals and individual employee objectives
c. coercing the immediate supervisor, peers, reporting officer and countersigning officer involved in the employee appraisal circle.
d. encouraging a retribution in the perfomance appraisal results.

9. A Reporting Officer in respect of the Performance Management System must be:
a. At least a substantive Director on Grade Level 17.
b. At most a senior officer of commendable attribues.
c. An immediate Supervisor and at least one substantive grade level above the Appraisee Officer.
d. At most an officer of a Directorate cadre in the Human Resources Management Department where the Officer being reported on works.

10. An Officer on secondment must be appraised by:
a. the Office that the officer is seconded to.
b. the releasing MDA that the Officer originally belongs.
c. the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation.
d. the Career Management Office (CMO).

11. Perfomance Management Cycle will run ...............
a. from April to March of every year.
b. from July to June of every year.
c. from October to September of every year.
d. from January to December of every year.

12. Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) should be drawn and agreed upon by .......... and final appraisal should be done by.............
a. March of each year,                      September of the same year.
b. April of each year,                      October of the same year.
c. January of each year,                    December of the same year.
d. May of each year,                        November of the same year.

13. In a situation where an Appraisee's performance falls below expectations (under-performance), .............will be adopted.
a. Performance Management Plan (PMP)
b. Performance Integrated Plan (PIP)
c. Performance Monitoring Plan (PMP)
d. Performance Improvement Plan (PIP).

14. Appraisal of officers must be conducted.............
a. in strict confidence.
b. in an open manner.
c. on a round-table setting.
d. in the presence of senior Directors.

15. An Officer who is authorized to attend a course of instruction outside Nigeria must sign a Bond to refund to Government all expenses for non-compliance with the following except:
a. obtain a certificate of satisfactory attendance at the course.
b. return to Nigeria.
c. remain in Service within a period of three years of his completing such a course.
d. undertake any other course of instruction without the specific approval of the Government.

16. A senior Officer sent overseas on a course of instruction for than .......months will be eligible for free air passage for himself and his spouse.
a. Twelve (12) 
b. Ten (10)
c. Nine (9)
d. Six (6)

17. Officers may be granted study leave with pay subject to a maximum of ......years.
a. Two (2)
b. Three (3)
c. Six (6)
d. Four (4)

18.For a journey by air, ............. is for Permanent Secretaries, Ministers and above, while  .......... is for officers on GL 7-17
a. First Class,                  Business Class
b. Second Class,                 Servant Class
c. Business Class,               Economy Class
d. Economy Class,                First Class.

19. The Public Service Rules are applicable to which Officers?
a. Civil Servants only.
b. Judicial Officers of Courts of Record.
c. Police Service Commission officers and the Officers of the Nigerian Army.
d. All officers in the Public Service except where the rules conflict with specific terms approved by the Federal Government and written into the contract of employement or letters of appointment.

20. The following organs of Government of the Federation derive their appointments from the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria except:
a. The Nigerian President, Vice-President, President of the Senate and Members, Speaker of the House of Representatives and Members, Secretary to the Government of the Federation and other Members of the Federal Executive Council 
b. Chief Justice of Nigeria, Justices of the Supreme Court, President and Justices of the COurt of Appeal, Chief Judge and Judges of the High Court of the High Court of the Federal Capital Territory (FCT), Grand Khadis and Kahdis of the Sharia Court of Appeal of the FCT, President and Judges of the Customary Court of Appeal of the FCT.
c. All State Governors, Special Advicers to the State Government, Permanent Secretaries of Treasury Funded Local Governments Chairmen and their appointees.
d. The Chairmen and Members of the following bodies: Auditor-General for the Federation, Code of Conduct Bureau; Code of Conduct Tribunal, FCSC, FCC, INEC, NPC, PSC and RMAFC 

21. The Accredited Representative of the Federal Republic of Nigeria is:
a. Governor of Federal Capital Territory.
b. Diplomatic or Consular Representative of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
c. Accountant General of the Federation.
d. Special Adviser to the President on Foreign Affairs.

22. Civil Service of the Federation is a 
a. Parastatals of the Government of the Federation.
b. All staff of the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) Plc.
c. Body or Organ which enjoys continuity of existence.
d. All the Personal Assistants to the Accounting Officers of the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs).

23. Classified Correspondence is a correspondence which has been graded:
a. Open and Competitive
b. Formal and informal
c. Interactive and engaging
d. Restricted, Confidential, Secret or Top Secret.

24. The Appointment of junior staff on grade level 06 and below is handled by:
a. Head of the Civil Service of the Federation only.
b. Accountant General of the Federation in conjunction with the IPPIS Office.
c. Junior Staff Committee as approved by the Accounting Officer of a Ministry/Extra-Ministerial Office.
d. Secretary to the Government of the Federation.

25. An appointment of officers of grade level 07-17 is handled by 
a. Federal Civil Service Commission.
b. Accountant General of the Federation in conjunction with the IPPIS Office.
c. Special Adviser to the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria on labour and productivity.
d. Secretary to the Government of the Federation.

26. The submission of applications for the appointment of officers of grade level 07-17 is within:
a. four weeks
b. Three months
c. Six weeks
d. Twenty-one working days

27. An annual competitive Public/Civil Service Entry Examination for is held for new entrants and tranferring serving officers on Grade Level:
a. Grade level 01-06
b. Grade Level 15-17
c. Grade Level 12-14
d. Grade Level 07-10

28. Candidates with required qualifications who are to be appointed into the State/ Zonal Offices of a Ministry/ Extra-Ministerial Office must be:
a. Candidates who studied in any Higher Institution in those States/ Zones
b. Residents of those States/ Zones
c. Candidates who did their NYSC Service in those States/ Zones.
d. Residents of the Federal Capital Territory (FCT).

29. The incremental date of an Officer appointed, or promoted to a post in the Federal Public Service is ...............on the condition that such Officer has spent at least ...........on the Grade with good performance before enjoying the increment.
a. 31st December of every year,            twelve (12) months
b. 1st June of every year,                 five (5) months
c. 31st March of every year,               three (3) months
d. 1st January of every year,              six (6) months

30. Seniority in the Public Service is based on the .................. certified by an authorized Officer and or ..................as reflected in the appropriate register and career progression of the concerned Officers.
a. Exit date from the previous employment ,                   date of last promotion examination
b. Approved leave date from the initial engagement,           date of last entry examination
c. Date on the last pay certificate,                          date of previous employment pay slip.
d. Entry date/the date of assumption of duty,                 date of present appointment.

31. The employment of unpaid staff into the public service is..........
a. prohibited
b. allowed
c. discretional
d. Circumstantial.

32. A Staff Record Form is also called .............., a copy of which must be sent to the National Record Centre in the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation, Accountant General's Office, Auditor General's Office and PenCom within............. of the appointment
a. Form Gen (60),                        One (1) Month
b. Letter of Administration (LoA)        Seven (7) days 
c. Last Pay Certiifcate (LPC)            Twelve (12) Months
d. Staff Pay Slip (SPL)                  Six (6) weeks.

33. Any change of date of birth in the record of service or other personnel records upon employment into the Public Service is regarded as..............
a. Unintentional error.
b. A mere mistake.
c. An act of serious misconduct.
d. An act of proper use of affidavit of change of birth date.

34. ...............means the filling of vacancies by direct appointment of persons not already in any of the Public Service of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
a. Volunteering
b. Promotion
c. Recruitment
d. Condonation

35. A person with requisite qualification can be employed into the public service as a trainee or pupil, on probation in a pensionable post, on non-pensionable contract, acting appointment and .................
a. Regular appointment
b. Appointment based on recommendation from a High Chief or Political Head.
c. Casual appointment
d. Special appointment.

36. The Federal Civil Service Commission (FCSC)'s employment of.......................is automatic irrespective of vacancy constraints:
a.  Confidential Driver to the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
b.  Orderly to the Honourable Minister of the Federal Capital Territory (FCT).
c.  National Youth Service Corps. (NYSC) Presidential Merit Award Winners.
d.  Chief Chef to the First Lady of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.

37. .....................of all recruitments in the Service are to be reserved for .....................
a.  12%                              Confidential Driver to the President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
b.  20%                              Orderly to the Honourable Minister of the Federal Capital Territory (FCT).
c.  10%                              Chief Chef to the First Lady of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
d.  5%                               persons with disability.

38. Eligibility for appointing every applicant into the Federal Public Service are (i) Between the age of 18 and 50 years; (ii) Having minimum qualification
as contained in the scheme of service; (iii)Having being certified by an authorized Healthcare Provider as medically fit; (iv) Having a testimonial of good conduct from the last employer or school attended;
(v) Having requisite qualification as contained in the scheme of service; and
a. no officer shall be appointed into the Federal Public Service without authorized establishment and recruitment waiver from the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation.
b. any officer seeking for an appointment into the Federal Public Service must seek clearance from the National Pension Commission.
c. no officer should seek Federal Government's appointment without Police extract.
d. every officer must possess a bank guarantee to confirm his/her loan and debt status.

39. No candidate would be considered for an appointment into the Federal Public Service for the following reasons except:
a. he has been convicted of a criminal offence.
b. he has been dismissed or called upon to resign or retire from the Public Service before.
c. he has left his previous employment without reasons and whether he is free from financial embarrassment.
d. he is into agricultural value chain.

40. When a newly appointed Officer assumes duty, he must enter his personal particulars on..........
a. Staff Hospital Form
b. Form Gen. 60
c. Staff salary form
d. Form TFL 10

41. In spite of the Freedom of Information Act, a newly employed Officer must sign..........
a. Financial Information Form
b. Property declaration form
c. Oath of Secrecy on Security (Form 1)
d. Salary negotiation form 20.

42. Which of the membership of the following association can be regarded as an act of serious misconduct in the Public Service.
a. Association of Ram Seller, FCT Chapter.
b. Society for Gulf-Players, Nasarawa Branch
c. Digital Society of Nigeria.
d. Membership of a Secret Society.

43. Membership of Junior Staff Committee (JSC) and Senior Staff Committee (SSC) in Parastatals includes which of the following:
a. Representative of Department of Human Resources Management of the supervising Ministry and An observer from the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation (OHCSF).
b. Representative of the Ministry of Labour, Productivity and Employment.
c. Representative of the National Directorate of employment (NDE).
d. Representative of the National Productivity Centre (NPC).

44. Kinds of short-term appointment in the Public Service include contract appointment, sabbatical appointment, career exchange programme, talent sourcing strategy, intership and
a. Permanent Secretary appointment
b. Senior Administrative appointment
c. Judicial appointment
d. Volunteerism.

45. Conditions for the contract appointment include the following except.
a. The Public Service no longer has officers with specific skills as provided in thhe scheme of service.
b. The contract appointment must be tied to funded projects/programmes with specific life span.
c. The contract appointment can be offered to expatriates when suitable Nigerians are not available and to Nigerians who either pensioners or over 50 years of age.
d. The contract appointment is pensionable.

46. Spouses married to Nigerians would remain on contract appointment, and not considered for permanent appointments until:
a. separated from their Nigerian partners.
b. divorced 
c. granted Nigerian citizenship
d. renounced Nigerian citizenship

47. The contract appointment should not be below which salary grade level (SGL)?
a. SGL 06
b. SGL 12
c. SGL 08
d. SGL 10

48. The Contract appointment duration should be ........ or.........and renewable but not more than ........ years in total.
a. two (2) or three (3) years,                      six (6) 
b. six (6) months or nine (9) months,               two (2)
c. one (1) or two (2) years,                        four (4)
d. three (3) or four (4) years,                     ten (10)

49. A contract officer must.............
a. accept posting or transfer to any part of the country.
b. refuse posting or transfer to any part of the country.
c. write petition to the Federal Civil Service Commission for posting or transfer outside the officer's Head office.
d. demand for double salary for any posting or transfer to any part of the country.

50. A contract officer should be subjected to.............
a. any valid relief from any performance evaluation.
b. performance appraisal through confidential report as applicable in the Public Service.
c. punishment for mentoring serving officers.
d. scrutiny for non-deduction of pension element from his salary.

51. A contract officer must sign...........
a. double remuneration agreement form.
b. A day-on, a day-off leave notice.
c. the oath of secrecy.
d. No-daily-pay, no-work declaration form.

52. A retired officer from the Public Service who is re-engaged into a career post, his appointment must be on a salary grade level immediately ........that on which he retired and be eligible to maintain his .......step at retirement.
a. below,                  last
b. above,                  first
c. same                    middle
d. higher                  first

53. An Officer serving on contract who wants to be re-engaged must formally write through the Accounting Officer at least ............ before his leave is due.
a. twelve (12) months
b. Six (6) months.
c. four (4) months.
d. One (1) month

54. ..............Appointment is applicable to an Officer on a salary grade level (SGL)............. for a period of 12 calendar months.
a. Temporary,                 SGL 08-10
b. Special,                   SGL 10-12
c. Acting,                    SGL 13-14
d. Sabbatical                 SGL 15 and above

55. An internship is for a period of .........months on part-time while it is for a period of......months on full-time.
a. 1 to 2 months,                  10 months
b. 3 to 6 months,                  12 months
c. 7 to 8 months,                  15 months
d. 6 to 9 months,                  24 months

56. ............ is the permanent release of an Officer from one scheduled service to another or from one class to another within the same Service.
a. Transfer
b. Secondment
c. Inter-Ministerial/ Agency posting
d. Condonation

57. ............is the temporary release of an Officer to the service of another Government, approved body or any recognised International Organization or body for a specific period.
a. Transfer
b. Secondment
c. Inter-Ministerial/ Agency posting
d. Condonation.

58. An Officer on transfer from State to Federal Service would be placed on a grade level ........than his current grade level.

a. lower                  
b. immediately above                  
c. same                    
d. higher                  

59. Secondment is for a maximum period of ....... years in the first instance after which the Officer may apply for extension or return to his former post but the total period of such secondment must not exceed ........years 
a. One (1) year,               three (3) years.
b. Two (2) years,              four (4) years.
c. Three (3) years,            Six (6) years.
d. Four (4) years,             Eight (8) years.

60. A secondment in the public interest must not exceed ........years.
a. One (1) year
b. Three (3) years
c. Five (5) years
d. Six (6) years.

61. An Officer on .................... receives salary from the MDA with the higher pay when there is a differential in payments between the releasing and receiving MDAs.
a. Transfer
b. Secondment in Public Interest
c. Inter-Ministerial/ Agency posting
d. Condonation.

62. A transfer of an Officer from one scheduled service to another is subject to ........................
a. Availability of funds to pay his salary and other allowances.
b. Availability of vacancies in the relevant grade and the applicant's discipline or area of specialty.
c. Availability of other professionals within the Officer's cadre.
d. Availability of adequate training programmes for the Officer's upskilling.

63. No Ministry/MDA is authorized to transfer or second any senior officer to any Parastatal under its supervision or accept any Officer seconded to it without the endorsement of...........
a. Staff Mobility Department of the Office of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation (OHCSF)
b. Office of the Secretary to the Government of the Federation.
c. Federal Civil Service Commission/ Board.
d. Career Management Office (CMO). 

64. Posting of Officers to posts outside their Professional Cadres is .............
a. prohibited
b. allowed
c. discretional
d. Circumstantial.

65. Posting of pool Officers in the Service becomes mandatory after every .............years.
a. Five (5) years 
b. Three (3) years
c. Four (4) years
d. Six (6) years.

66. Any Officer that fails to proceed on posting would be regarded as a ...............
a. Commendation
b. Complicity
c  Connivance
d. Misconduct

67. A period of Acting appointment must not exceed ........... but in exceptional circumstances may be extended to another .............
a. Five (5) years,             two (2) years
b. One  (1) year,              one (1) year              
c. Four (4) years,             three (3) years
d. Six  (6) years.             Four (4) years

68. All Officers who fall within the field of selection for any promotion exercise would be considered except...............
a. those wish to remain in their current grade level for any fear of being posted out of the present office.
b. those have been advised by their clergymen to remain satisfied with the current position.
c. those who are under disciplinary action.
d. those who feel disatisfied with the recent currency devaluation.

69. The minimum of number of years for the eligibility of officers on GL 06 and below, GL 07-14 and GL 15-17 are ............, .............. and ................respectively.
a. Minimum of 3 years, 4 years and 5 years.
b. Minimum of 1 year, 2 years and 3 years.
c. Minimum of 4 years, 5 years and 6 years.
d. Minimum of 2 years, 3 years and 4 years.

70. Which MDAs are responsible for promotion of officers on GL 06 and below; GL 07 to 14 and GL 15-17?
a. Ministry, Department and Agency (MDA) via Junior Staff COmmittee,    MDA or relevant staff pool with the approval of OHCSF subject to confirmation by FCSC,      FCSC on recommendation from MDA or the relevant pool routed through OHCSF.
b. Presidency,                                                          Ministry of Labour and Productivity,                                                         Auditor General for the Federation.
c. Accountant General of the Federation,                                Staff Mobility Department of the Federal Civil Service Commission,                           Employee Promotion Department of the Head of Civil Service of the Federation.
d. National Productivity Centre (NPC),                                  MDA in conjunction with the National Directorate of Employment,                                Presidential Initiative on Federal Government employees' performance Appraisal Policty.      

71. The effective date of all promotions in the Public Service is.............
a. 31st December of every year.         
b. 1st June of every year.                
c. 31st March of every year.             
d. 1st January of every year.             
                             
72. The eligibility criteria for the post of permanent secretaries entails the following except:
a. being a Federal Civil Service Director on GL 17 for at least two years and on IPPIS.
b. Not retiring on or before the 31st of December of the following year.
c. Having a proof of indigenship of the State where vacancy exists but the indigenship must not be by marriage in case of a female Civil Servant.
d. Having pending disciplinary action but already seeking presidential intervention.

73. The examination process for the post of permanent secretaries involve:
a. Written examination
b. Test of ICT proficiency
c. Driving Competency test.
d. Oral interview

74. Officers who fail promotion examinations after ............consecutive attempts or who absent themselves from an examination without reasons acceptable to the FCSC would be deemed to have exited from the Service.
a. Two (2)
b. Three (3)
c. Four (4)
d. Five (5).

75. An officer whose service is no longer required would be required to leave the Service due to the following reasons except:
a. Abolition of office
b. Re-organization of the office
c. Redundancy
d. Leave of absence.

76. A Grade Level 17 Director in the Public Service who already spent ............years on the post must compulsorily retire from the Service.
a. Six (6)
b. Eight (8)
c. Ten (10)
d. Five (5).

77. A Permanent Secretary should hold office for a term of ........years and renewable for a further term of ........years, subject to satisfactory performance.
a. Three (3) years,            three (3) years.
b. Five (5) years,             five (5) years.
c. Six (6) years,              Six (6) years.
d. Four (4) years,             Four (4) years.

78. Officers who exit the Service would be paid his retirement benefits and would access his National Housing Funds (NHF) contributions within .......of retirement.
a. Six months
b. One month
c. Three months
d. Twelve months.

79. A person engaged by the Government on a non-pensionable appointment basis is eligible for a .......... of his basic salary as a severance allowance after the satisfactory completion of a tour of service.
a. 15%
b. 25%
c. 75%
d. 12%

80. Interdiction means
a. Transition from old pension scheme to the new pension.
b. Forgiving arising from the gap in service.
c. Temporary removal of an officer from performing his normal duties when disciplinary proceedings for his dismissal are being undertaken or is about to be undertaken and shall be placed on a half-salary pending the detaermination of the case. 
d. Permanent removal of an officer from the public servicd and he /she shall be placed on a half-salary pending the detaermination of the case. 

81. ...............is a reference document in the public service that specifies the duties of each post, method of entry, including qualification requirements and the prerequisites for advancement within and beyond cadres.
a. Curriculum Vitae (CV)
b. Confirmation of appointment
c. Schedule of duties
d. Scheme of service

82. Suspension is a___________________
a. a. Transition from old pension scheme to the new pension.
b. Permanent removal of an officer from the public servicd and he /she shall be placed on a half-salary pending the detaermination of the case. 
c. Removal of an Officer from performing the duties of his office, where a prima facie case of a serious nature has been established against the Officer, during which period he shall earn no salary.
d. Forgiving arising from the gap in the length of service of an officer.

83. _____________is a post provided for under the Personnel emoluments sub-head of the Estimates.
a. Established post
b. Duty post of Senior Mid-Wifery of a Government recognised Hospital.
c. Security post of an office in the Nigerian Army.
d. UN Permanent post for an expatriate.

84. Public Service of the Federation is.........................
a. Parastatals of the Government of the Federation.
b. The service of the Federation in any capacity in respect of the Government of the Federation as defined in part 4 Section 318 of 1999 Constitution (as amended).
b. All staff of the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC) Plc.
d. All the Personal Assistants to the Accounting Officers of the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs).

85. The implementation of virtual meetings/engagements in the Public Service is...........
a. to promote business activities among government workers as a way of earning secondary income.
b. to ensure that employees are able to respond to work demands remotely.
c. to combat cyber crimes among public servants in the country.
d. to generate online revenue to make more funds for various expenditures of government.

86. The Federal Civil Service Commission has delegated full disciplinary powers against erring Officers on Salary Grade Level (GL)  .................., to Permanent Secretaries and Heads of Extra-Ministerial Offices
a. GL 15 and above
b. GL GL 06 and below
c. GL 13 and below
d. GL 10 and below.

87. The Federal Civil Service Commission has delegated full power of dismissal against erring Officers on Salary Grade Level (GL)  .................., to Permanent Secretaries and Heads of Extra-Ministerial Offices.
a. GL 15 and above
b. GL GL 06 and below
c. GL 13 and below
d. GL 07 and above.

88. .....................consists of a series of omissions or incompetence, the cummulative effect of which shows that the Officer is not capable of discharging efficiently the duties of the office he holds.
a. Dismissal
b. Interdiction
c. Suspension
d. General Inefficiency.

89. Before the proceedings for the removal of an Officer for general inefficiency may have been instituted, he must have been warned on ..........occasions in writing.
a. Two (2)
b. Five (5)
c. Three (3)
d. Ten (10) .

90. ............is a specific act of wrong-doing or an improper behaviour which is inimical to the image of the service and which ca be investigated and proved.
a. General Inefficiency
b. Dismissal
c. Interdiction
d. Misconduct.

91. ............ can lead to termination and retirement.
a. Office Rumour mongering
b. Dismissal
c. Interdiction
d. Misconduct.

92. All disciplinary procedures should not exceed ....... in the case of Junior Staff, except where it is a criminal case.
a. Fifteen (15) working days
b. Twenty-one (21) working days
c. Sixty (60) days
d. Twenty-eight (28) days.

93. All disciplinary procedures should not exceed ....... in the case of Senior Staff, except where it is a criminal case.
a. Fifty (50) working days
b. One hundred and eighty (180) days
c. Sixty (60) days
d. Seventy-Two (72) hours.

94............is a specific act of very serious wrong-doing and an improper behaviour which is inimical to the image of the service and which ca be investigated and if proven, may lead to dismissal.
a. General Inefficiency
b. Dismissal
c. Interdiction
d. Serious Misconduct.

95. An interdicted Officer may be placed on ..............pay pending the determination of his case
a. full-salary
b. nil-salary
c. half-salary 
d. double-salary

96. The ultimate penalty for serious misconduct is...........
a. Suspension
b. general inefficiency
c. condonation
d. dismissal.

97. An Officer in a serious financial embarrassment will be disqualified from ............
a. receiving salaries.
b. promotion or acting in a higher appointment.
c. going on statutory annual or causal leave.
d. attending any training programme.

98. Any Officer seeking elective position must resign.............before the election.
a. One (1) month
b. Three (3) months
c. Six (6) months 
d. Nine (9) months.

99. Generally, serving officers are prohibited from accepting chieftaincy titles until after................
a. an alimony is paid to the Government
b. the attainment of the rank of full directorship in the Public Service.
c. retirement from Service.
d. abolition of his Office.

100. An Officer is in a serious financial embarrassment if the aggregate sum of his unsecured debts and liabilities at any point in time exceed..............
a. the sum of three times his monthly emoluments.
b. the sum of his twelve months salary.
c. the total amount of six months of statutory allowances.
d. the sum of nine (9) months of his emoluments.

101. The following are kinds of disciplinary measures that may be taken against any erring public officer except.
a. Dismissal, termination or retirement
b. Reduction in salary or rank
c. Attrition in chastisement
d. Witholding or deferment of increment.

102. An appeal from an aggrieved Officer must be handled and concluded within.............
a. One (1) month
b. Three (3) months
c. Six (6) months 
d. Nine (9) months.

103. An appeal/petition must carry the following except:
a. Full name
b. Staff Number
c. Signature and Address of the Appellant/Petitioner/ Complainant.
d. National Identity Number (NIN) of the Appellant/Petitioner/ Complainant.

104. An Appeal/ petition will not be looked into, for the following reasons except.
a. deals with s case in which legal action is pending in a  COurt of Law.
b. is illegible or meaningless.
c. complies with Public Service Rule (PSR) 110102 of the year, 2021.
d. is worded in abusive, improper, foul language or a repetition of a previous petition.

105. .............is the maximum aggregate sick leave that an officer is entitled to, during any period of twelve months.
a. Three (3) months
b. Six (6) months
c. Nine (9) months
d. Twelve (12) months.

106. When a pensionable officer dies in Service, the Government will pay.......percent of his total annual emolument to the deceased family as burial expenses.
a. 300%
b. 100% 
c. 200%
d. 75%

107. Any prolonged absence from duty on account of illness should be supported with the following documents except:
a. Excuse Duty Certificate
b. Light Duty Certificate
c. Heavy Duty Certificate
d. Medical Certificate of Treatment. 

108. For a medical check-up abroad, officers on ........must  obtain the approval of the Head of the Civil Service of the Federation.
a. Salary Grade Level 06 and below
b. Salary Grade Level 07-10
c. Salary Grade Level 15-17
d. Salary Grade Level 12 and above

109. Where medical treatment is to occur in Nigeria but outside the Officer's duty post, he must be provided with .........at the prevailing rate.
a. Estacode Allowance
b. Hotel Accommodation Allowance
c. Duty Tour Allowance
d. Kilometre Allowance

110. ...........is the authorized absence of an Officer from duty for specific period.
a. Training
b. condonation
c. transfer
d. leave

111. Thirty (30) working days, Twenty-one (21) working days and Fourteen (14) working days are authorized leave period for Officers on Grade Levels ............,     ................ and ................respectively.
a. GL 07 and above, GL 04-06 and GL 03 and below
b. GL 15 and above, GL 14-08 and GL 07 and below
c. GL 14 and above, GL 13-07 and GL 06 and below
d. GL 16 and above, GL 15-09 and GL 08 and below.

112. An Officer would qualify for annual leave not less than ............. after the previous leave within a leave earning service year.
a. One (1) month
b. Two (2) months
c. Four (4) months
d. Six (6) months.

113. Leave will be taken at one time but it may be taken in not more than..............
a. Three (3) installments
b. Four (4)  installment
c. Two (2)   installment
d. Five (5)  installment

114. Any leave not utilized within the............. concerned will be forfeited.
a. first three (3) months of the following year
b. the calendar year
c. initial two (2) months of the following year
d. first month of the subsequent year

115. An Officer will be granted a proportionate leave for the period he put in Service for the reasons except:
a. If he is attending a course of instruction/training over a period of six months.
b. If he is retiring within the period of Leave-Earning Service.
c. If he is joining the Federal Public Service during the course of the Leave Year. 
d. If he is working with the Head of an Extra-Ministerial Office as a domestic servant.

116. .........is the maximum number of days of a casual leave that an officer is entitled to, after exhausting his annual leave.
a. 5 days
b. 3 days
c. 7 days
d. 10 days.

117. A pregnant female officer is entiled to........... maternity leave at a stretch commencing not less than .......from the expected date of delivery.
a. 112 working days,                 28 working days
b. 72 working days,                  15 working days
c. 96 working days,                  21 working days
d. 102 working days,                 24 working days

118. If a female officer adopts a child under four months old with an evidence of approval of the adoption, she would enjoy .........maternity leave.
a. 112 working days
b. 72 working days
c. 84 working days
d. 102 working days

119. If a family of a male officer adopts a child under four months old with an evidence of approval of the adoption, he would enjoy .........maternity leave.
a. 64 working days
b. 44 working days
c. 24 working days
d. 14 working days

120. Sabbatical leave is applicable to Officers on GL 15 and above from duty for a period of ..........calendar months once in ...........years
a. twelve (12) calendar months,                   five (5) years
b. ten (10) calendar months,                      six (6) years
c. eight(8) calendar months,                      four (4) years
d. six (6) calendar months,                       two (2) years

121. Study leave in the public service includes the following  except:
a. Leave for professional study
b. Leave for in-service training
c. study leave with pay
d. study leave without pay.

122. Study leave with pay and leave for in-service training should not exceed .......with a maximum ........extension.
a. four (4) years,                two (2) years
b. two (2) years,                 one (1) year
c. three (3) years,               three (3) years
d. five (5) years,                four (4) years

123. The full meaning of PRESSSID is
a. Preparatory Relief Enhancement Subsisdy Stabilization Strategy in Depot (PRESSSID)
b.Presidential Special School Scheme for Independent Development (PRESSSID)
c. Presidential Special Scholarship Scheme for Innovation and Development (PRESSSID)
d. Presidential Safe School Scheme for Innovation and Development (PRESSSID)

124. The conditions for study leave without pay include the following except:
a. the proposed course of study is contained in the approved training proposal for the MDAs of the concerned officer
b. Officers on study leave without pay are entitled to normal emoluments and allowances.
c. the duration of the study leave without pay must not be more than four years in the first instance
d. the period of study should not be regarded as a break in service.

125. An Officer may be allowed special leave from duty on full pay on compassionate ground for a period up to.........for burial of spouse/child/parents/parents of spouse.
a. Four (4) weeks
b. Six (6) weeks
c. Five (5) weeks
d. Two (2) weeks

126. .........is absence of an Officer from duty authorized on grounds of public policy.
a. Study leave
b. Leave of absence
c. Casual Leave
d. Examination leave

127. Leave of absence can be in form of the following except.
a. Leave of absence to join spouse on grounds of public policy and to join spouse on a course of intruction of not less than nine (9) months duration abroad.
b. Leave of absence on public policy for Technical Aid programmes and Special / Personal Assistant on grounds of public policy.
c. Leave of absence for spouse of Presidents, Vice Presidents, Governors, Deputy Governors on grounds of public policy.
d. Leave of absence to take up political appointments such as Ministers, Commissioners, SSG, SGF.

128. A female officer who is nursing a child is entitled to........every day up to a maximum period of .........from the date she resumes duty from maternity leave.
a. five (5) hours off-duty,                  ten (10) months.
b. seven (7) hours off-duty,                 twelve (12) months.
c. two (2) hours off-duty,                   six (6) months.
d. four (4) hours off-duty,                  three (3) months.

129. A male officer is entitled to paternity leave for a period of ...........and not more than once in ..........for a maximum of .......... children.
a. 32 working days,           6 years,           nine
b. 28 working days,           4 years,           seven
c. 24 working days,           3 years,           five
d. 14 working days,           2 years,           four

130. The following officers are entitled to Kilometre Allowance except:
a. A newly appointed officer
b. A retiring officer with spouse and four (4) children
c. An officer undertaking responsibility using his own car and on transfer or posting or where air transport services do not exist
d. An officer working with a Chief Executive,  living at a very far distance to the office.

131. A retiring officer is entitled to .......of his gross annual emolument as ...........
a. 100%,                       Resposibility Allowance
b. 75%,                        Resettlement Allowance
c. 25%,                        Disengagement Allowance
d. 50%,                        Hardship Allowance

132. A newly appointed, transferred or posted officer outside his/her station is entitled to transport fare for ...........as..........allowance.
a. Self, spouse and at most four children,                Hotel accommodation allowance (1st 28 days)
b. Self, parents and domestic workers,                    Responsibility allowance 
c. Self, Immediate supervisor and four colleagues         Resettlement allowance
d. Self, and siblings,                                    Hazard allowance

133. An officer on an approved official trip is entitled to ............to pay for lodging and feeding expenses.
a. Resettlement allowance.
b. Kilometre allowance
c. Hotel accommodation allowance
d. Duty tour allowance

134. ..............is the 30% of Duty Tour Allowance.
a. Resettlement allowance.
b. Transport and Local running allowance
c. Hotel accommodation allowance
d. Duty tour allowance

135. Officers are eligible for appropriate estacode allowance for the following reasons except:
a. Performing special duty abroad
b. Carrying out official duties during vacation leave abroad
c. Undertaking undergraduate/ postgraduate course for improving his performance in the office.
d. On a delegation or visit to an organization abroad for a short period.

136. The following officers are entitled to responsibility allowance except:
a. Chief Cofidential Secretaries of the President, Vice President, Senate President, SPeaker of House of Reps., CJN, SGF,HCSF, and Hon. Ministers
b. Assistant Chief Confidential Secretaries to Perm Sec.s. CEOs and Directors.
c. Principal Secretaries to the General Managers of Extra-Ministerial Offices.

137. Payment for overtime on normal working days would be at the rate of .........of the monthly consolidated salary subject to a maximum of ......in one month
a. 1.4 percent,          90 hours
b. 1.2 percent,          75 hours
c. 0.9 percent,          60 hours
d. 0.7 percent,          45 hours

138. Payment for overtime on weekends would be at the rate of ................of the normal overtime rate whereas on public holidays, the rate would be ............ the normal overtime rate.
a. 1.5 percent,               double
b. 3.5 percent,               triple
c. 2.5 percent,               triple
b. 0.9 percent,               Quadruple

139. .......... will be paid as Resettlement allowance to a posted or transferred officer whose living condition has been disturbed by such posting or transfer
a. 1.5 percent of annual total emolument
b. 2 percent of annual total emolument
c. 0.75 percent of annual total emolument
d. 3.5 percent of annual total emolument

140. Officers on shift duties and are not Health professionals will be paid shift duty allowance at the rate of .........of their monthly salaries.
a. 15 percent
b. 50 percent
c. 35 percent
d. 25 percent

141. Drivers who have been driving for a period of at least six months in a year, and not involved in an accident will be paid non-accident bonus at the rate of .......per annum.
a. N150,000
b. N120,000
c. N75,000
d. N50,000

142. When an Officer is reported missing and he/she is not located within a period of ..........from the date he/she was declared missing, a Board of Enquiry will be set up to determine if it is reasonable to presume that the officer is dead.
a. four years
b. three years
c. one year
d. two years

143. Deferred leave is ............ in the Nigerian Public Service
a. permitted
b. existent
c. claimale
d. abolished

144. An Officer serving abroad is entitled to ...........of his annual Foreign Service Allowance as leave transport grant.
a. 5 percent
b. 2 percent
c. 15 percent
d. 7.5 percent

145. Officers transferred from one post abroad to another or from Nigeria to a post abroad will be entitled to ........... and ...........of consolidated salary.
a. 15% (Married),             20% (Single)
b. 12% (Married),             10% (Single)
c. 7% (Married),              5% (Single)
d. 10% (Married),             7.5% (Single)








PSR ANSWERS
I. d
2. b
3. b
4. a
5. d
6. c
7. d
8. a
9. c
10. a
11. d
12. c
13. d
14. a
15. d
16. c
17. d
18. c
19.  d
20.  c
21.  b
22.  c
23.  d
24.  c
25.  a
26.  c
27.  d
28.  b
29.  d
30.  d
31.  a
32.  a
33.  c
34. c
35. d
36. c
37. d
38. a
39. d
40. b
41. c
42. d
43. a
44. d
45. d
46. c
47. b
48. c
49. a
50. b
51. c
52. a
53. c.
54. d
55. b
56. a
57. b
58. a
59. b
60. d
61. b
62. b
63. c.
64. a
65. c
66. d.
67. b
68. c
69. d
70. a.
71. d.
72. d
73. c
74. b
75. d
76. b
77. d
78. b
79. a
80.  c
81.  d
82.  c
83.  a
84.  b
85. c
86. c
87. b
88. d
89. c
90. d
91. d
92. c
93. b
94. d
95. c
96. d
97. c
98. c
99. c
100. a
101. c
102. c
103. d
104. c
105. a
106. b
107. c
108. d
109. c
110. d
111. a
112. d
113. c
114. b
115. d
116. c
117. a
118. a
119. d
120. a
121. a
122. b
123. c
124. a
125. d
126. b
127. d
128. c
129. d
130.  d
131.  c
132.  a
133.  d
134.  b
135.  c
136.  c
137.  d
138.  a
139. b
140. a
141. d
142. c
143. d
144. b
145. c



















CURRENT AFFAIRS

QUESTIONS:
1.The North-East Development Commission (NEDC) has its main headquarters located in which State...........................
a. Adamawa State
b. Kaduna State
c. Bauchi State
d. Borno State

2. The three Nations sharing FIFA tournament hosting duties..............., ................. and ....................
a. China, Belgium and Morroco
b. United States, Canada, and Mexico
c. Cuba, France and Germany
d. Brazil, China and Japan

3. FIFA suspended a red card ban on ................... who is USA striker.
a. Raheem Sterlin
b. Victor Osimhen
c. Folarin Balogun 
d. Taiwo Olaogun

4. The current Minister of Finance and Coordinating Minister of the Economy is..........................
a.Chief Wale Edun.
b. Dr. Zach Adelabu Adedeji
c. Bianca Ojukwu
d. Taiwo Oyedele

5. ................was the former Boss of the allegedly fictitious government entity known as the Presidential Foreign Intervention Promotion Council (PFIPC) or the Presidential Economic Advisory Council (PEAC)
a. Prince Aderemi Adeniji Maxwell
b. Prince Adeniyi Adeyemi Matthew 
c. Prince Adeogun Ajose Emmanuel
d. Prince Adedeji Aderinle Mathew

6.The South-East Development Commission (NEDC) has its main headquarters located in which State...........................
a. Edo State
b. Abia State
c. Ebonyi State
d. Enugu State

7. The current Minister of Housing and Urban Development is ..................................
a. Ahmed Musa Dangiwa.
b. Balarabe Musa
c. Muttaqha Rabe Darma 
d. Bayo Onanuga

8. The South-West Development Commission (NEDC) has its main headquarters located in which State...........................
a. Ondo State
b. Lagos State
c. Osun State
d. Oyo State


9. The current Minister of Minister of Power is ..................................
a. Joseph Olasunkanmi Tegbe .
b. Ambassador Sola Enikanolaiye
c. Bianca Odumegwu-Ojukwu 
d. Chief Adebayo Adelabu


10. The South-South Development Commission (NEDC) has its main headquarters located in which State...........................
a. Delta State
b. Rivers State
c. Calabar State
d. Akwa-Ibom State








CURRENT AFFAIRS (ANSWERS)

1. d
2. b
3. c
4. d
5. b
6. d
7. c
8. d
9. a
10. d





